# Mini-Project 1 (Explaining Query Results)
Moodle submission of project report is due by October 18th at 23:55
This project is concerned with an important capability in data management today, namely providing “explanations” of some sort for the tuples obtained in a query result. To support this, the relational data model is extended to annotated relations. If R(A1,...,An) is a standard relation/table, then an annotated relation R’(A1,..,An,I) has extra attribute(s) I that records more information for each tuple in R’. The query processor module considers and manipulates tuple annotations and produces to produce the output which is also an annotated relation. To begin with, we require I to be at least one attribute that indicates tuple IDs. Tuple IDs are unique within a relation or across the database, and help for instance explain how each tuple t in a query output was obtained using the tuples in the database. The explanation is the annotation obtained for t during query processing. In a simple case, this explanation is done by associating with t the set of IDs of contributing tuples. This is referred to as lineage. Other possible annotation attributes/columns could be to denote multiplicity or probability/certainty of tuples. There are different syntax and semantics for explanations defined on the basis of the annotations of input tuples. Please refer to the paper by Green et al (PODS 2007), provided in the project folder. In particular, check out the example relation instances and queries for a quick understanding the types and applications of explanations. In the literature, the term provenance refers to what called here as explanations.
Consider a database D that includes Annotated relations R(A1,A2,...,An, I) and S(B1,B2,...,Bm, J), in which As and Bs are normal attributes, and I and J are special attributes called tuple IDs. The tuple IDs in each relation is unique. You may use integers 1,2,3,... as the IDs of tuples in R. Let Q be a SQL query defined as follows that joins R and S.
SELECT A2, A3
FROM R, S
WHERE R.A2 = S.B2 AND R.A3 = S.B3;
We evaluate Q and store the results as an annotated relation T(A1,..,An,B1,...,Bm, K), where K is the annotations of tuples in T, that is, for each tuple in T, its annotation K is a bag of annotations of tuples in R and S that contributed to t. Develop a simple but suitable interface such that for any tuple t in T, you can display its associated annotation.
Create different instances of relations R and S with tuple numbers in the order of 10, 100, 1000, 10000, etc and report the performance in terms of time and scalability (that is, how large the relations could go while being able to evaluate Q and store T).
For your implementation, fix the number of attributes n and m in R and S to be at least 5. The PODs will create sample input tuples and make them available in Moodle as additional data to evaluate your code.
Please contact the PODs and the instructor, for any questions you have on this project.
  
